WIP: Proposed CycloneDX v2.0 additions to the AI/ML property Taxonomy (#175)
CycloneDX/cyclonedx-property-taxonomy: cdx/ai-ml.md

      {
        "name": "cdx:ai-ml:model:modality",
        "value": "instruct"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

> ### `cdx:ai-ml:model:language` Namespace Taxonomy

Reviewer: somehow, this makes no sense.
the namespace is `cdx:ai-ml:model:tokenizer` and the properties are `cdx:ai-ml:model:*`

Model language values MUST be valid [ISO 639-1 language codes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_ISO_639_language_codes).

| Property | Description |
| -------- | ----------- |

> | `cdx:ai-ml:model:tokenizer` | Mark a component as a (model) tokenizer. _Boolean value_. </br> This property MAY appear once. |

Reviewer: why is `cdx:ai-ml:model:tokenizer` under `cdx:ai-ml:model:language` Namespace Taxonomy ?
It is supposed to be under `cdx:ai-ml:model` Namespace Taxonomy

Author: Good catch Jan, I broke it back out as its own property table (as it appeared before this PR) and added an example as well.

| Property | Description |
| -------- | ----------- |
| `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:count` | Total number of learned parameters for the model. This reflects the model's design and structure (e.g., number of layers in a neural network, nodes, and connectivity). </br> The value SHOULD use the industry-standard naming convention of number followed by one of the letters: `M` (Million), `B` (Billion) or `T` (Trillion). May appear once. |

> | `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:tune_method` | Describes how the model was fine-tuned on or adapted to new data. This property MAY appear multiple times. Value SHOULD be of industry-standard keywords such as those [listed in the section below](#names-of-industry-standard-fine-tuning-methods). Value MUST be a single keyword (e.g., `lora`) or a comma separated list of keywords (e.g., `sft,rlhf`). </br> This property MAY occur multiple times. |

Reviewer: > This property MAY appear multiple times. 
and 
> This property MAY occur multiple times.

this are duplicates

Author: Pushed commit to fix

| Property | Description |
| -------- | ----------- |
| `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:count` | Total number of learned parameters for the model. This reflects the model's design and structure (e.g., number of layers in a neural network, nodes, and connectivity). </br> The value SHOULD use the industry-standard naming convention of number followed by one of the letters: `M` (Million), `B` (Billion) or `T` (Trillion). This property MAY appear once. |
| `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:tune_method` | Describes how the model was fine-tuned on or adapted to new data. Values SHOULD be industry-standard keywords such as those [listed in the section below](#names-of-industry-standard-fine-tuning-methods). Value MUST be a single keyword (e.g., `lora`) or a comma separated list of keywords (e.g., `sft,rlhf`). </br> This property MAY appear multiple times. |

> | `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:scheme` | Identifies the quantization scheme applied to the model. Value SHOULD be one of the [quantization scheme values listed below](#quantization-scheme-values). MUST be set before any other `quantization` sub-properties are used. MAY appear once. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:scheme` | Identifies the quantization scheme described by the accompanying quantization sub-properties. Value SHOULD be one of the [quantization scheme values listed below](#quantization-scheme-values). This property MUST be present whenever any other `quantization` sub-property is used. MAY appear once. |
```

> | `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:scale` | The scale factor(s) used by the quantization scheme. For per-tensor quantization, value is a single decimal number (e.g., `0.0078125`). For per-axis quantization, value is a JSON numeric array with elements ordered by axis index (e.g., `[0.0078125, 0.015625]`). MAY appear once. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:scale` | The scale factor(s) used by the quantization scheme. For per-tensor quantization, value is a string containing a single decimal number (e.g., `"0.0078125"`). For per-axis quantization, value is a string containing a JSON-serialized numeric array whose element `i` applies to slice `i` along the tensor dimension selected by `quantization:axis` (e.g., `"[0.0078125,0.015625]"`). MAY appear once. |
```

> | `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:zeroPoint` | The zero-point offset(s) used by the quantization scheme. For per-tensor quantization, value is a single integer (e.g., `128`). For per-axis quantization, value is a JSON integer array ordered by axis index (e.g., `[128, 0]`), with cardinality matching `quantization:scale`. MAY appear once. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:zeroPoint` | The zero-point offset(s) used by the quantization scheme. For per-tensor quantization, value is a string containing a single integer (e.g., `"128"`). For per-axis quantization, value is a string containing a JSON-serialized integer array whose element `i` applies to slice `i` along the tensor dimension selected by `quantization:axis` (e.g., `"[128,0]"`), with cardinality matching `quantization:scale`. MAY appear once. |
```

| Property | Description |
| -------- | ----------- |
| `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:count` | Total number of learned parameters for the model. This reflects the model's design and structure (e.g., number of layers in a neural network, nodes, and connectivity). </br> The value SHOULD use the industry-standard naming convention of number followed by one of the letters: `M` (Million), `B` (Billion) or `T` (Trillion). This property MAY appear once. |
| `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:tune_method` | Describes how the model was fine-tuned on or adapted to new data. Values SHOULD be industry-standard keywords such as those [listed in the section below](#names-of-industry-standard-fine-tuning-methods). Value MUST be a single keyword (e.g., `lora`) or a comma separated list of keywords (e.g., `sft,rlhf`). </br> This property MAY appear multiple times. |

> | `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:scheme` | Identifies the quantization scheme described by the accompanying quantization sub-properties. Value SHOULD be one of the [quantization scheme values listed below](#quantization-scheme-values). This property MUST be present whenever any other `quantization` sub-property is used. MAY appear once. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:scheme` | Identifies the quantization scheme described by the accompanying quantization sub-properties. Value SHOULD be one of the [quantization scheme values listed below](#quantization-scheme-values). This property MUST be present whenever another `quantization` sub-property is used, except when those sub-properties annotate a named CycloneDX 2.0 model input or output and a typed `quantization.scheme` is present. In that context, the typed field is authoritative and this property SHOULD be omitted. This property MAY appear once. |
```

> | `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:scheme` | Identifies the quantization scheme described by the accompanying quantization sub-properties. Value SHOULD be one of the [quantization scheme values listed below](#quantization-scheme-values). This property MUST be present whenever any other `quantization` sub-property is used. MAY appear once. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:scheme` | Identifies the quantization scheme described by the accompanying quantization sub-properties. Value SHOULD be one of the [quantization scheme values listed below](#quantization-scheme-values). This property MUST be present whenever another `quantization` sub-property is used, except when those sub-properties annotate a named CycloneDX 2.0 model input or output and a typed `quantization.scheme` is present. In that context, the typed field is authoritative and this property SHOULD be omitted. This property MAY appear once. |
```

| `alora` | Allocating Low-Rank Adaptation (ALoRA). A standard Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) method. |
| `qlora` | Quantized low-rank adaptation (QLoRA). A standard Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) method. |

#### Quantization scheme values

The `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:scheme` property identifies the mathematical contract between floating-point values and their quantized integer representation. A scheme determines which companion sub-properties (`scale`, `zeroPoint`, `granularity`, `axis`) are meaningful. Future schemes MAY introduce additional sub-properties under the same `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:` namespace without conflicting with existing entries.

| Value | Description |
| ----- | ----------- |

> | `affine_asymmetric` | Affine (uniform) asymmetric quantization. Maps the floating-point range to an integer range via a scale and a non-zero zero-point: `x_float = scale × (x_int − zeroPoint)`. The companion `scale` and `zeroPoint` sub-properties MUST be present. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `affine_asymmetric` | Affine (uniform) asymmetric quantization. Maps the floating-point range to an integer range via a scale and zero-point: `x_float = scale * (x_int - zeroPoint)`. The zero-point is not constrained by a symmetry requirement and may therefore be zero. The companion `scale` and `zeroPoint` sub-properties MUST be present. |
```

> | `affine_symmetric` | Affine (uniform) symmetric quantization. A specialization of affine quantization where the zero-point is fixed at zero, halving the integer range to keep the zero crossing exact. The companion `scale` sub-property MUST be present; `zeroPoint` SHOULD be omitted or set to `0`. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `affine_symmetric` | Affine (uniform) symmetric quantization. A specialization of affine quantization that applies a symmetry constraint around real zero. The companion `scale` sub-property MUST be present. The zero-point convention depends on the declared integer representation; for zero-centered signed INT8 storage, `zeroPoint` is `0`. |
```

| `alora` | Allocating Low-Rank Adaptation (ALoRA). A standard Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) method. |
| `qlora` | Quantized low-rank adaptation (QLoRA). A standard Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) method. |

#### Quantization scheme values

> The `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:scheme` property identifies the mathematical contract between floating-point values and their quantized integer representation. A scheme determines which companion sub-properties (`scale`, `zeroPoint`, `granularity`, `axis`) are meaningful. Future schemes MAY introduce additional sub-properties under the same `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:` namespace without conflicting with existing entries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:scheme` property identifies the mathematical contract between floating-point values and their quantized integer representation. A scheme determines which companion sub-properties (`scale`, `zeroPoint`, `granularity`, `axis`) are meaningful. Future schemes MAY introduce additional sub-properties under the same `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:` namespace without conflicting with existing entries.

When these affine quantization sub-properties annotate a named CycloneDX 2.0 model input or output, the typed `scheme`, `granularity`, and `axis` fields, when present, are authoritative for that parameter. Producers SHOULD NOT additionally provide `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:scheme` when typed `scheme` is present, `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:granularity` when typed `granularity` is present, or `cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:axis` when typed `axis` is present. The sibling `scale` and `zeroPoint` properties MAY supplement the typed object with affine mapping values for that named input or output. They record parameter-bound external affine mapping metadata and do not supersede any corresponding serialized mapping data associated with the model artifact.
```

}
```

#### Example: Using quantization parameters (per-tensor, affine asymmetric)

> The following pseudocode shows how to describe a TFLite-style INT8 affine asymmetric per-tensor quantization on a model's model card:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following pseudocode shows how to describe per-tensor affine asymmetric quantization parameters in a model card:
```

```jsonc
{
  // ...
  "components": [{
    "type": "machine-learning-model",
    "name": "my quantized model",
    "modelCard": {
      // ...
      "modelParameters": {
        "properties": [
          {
            "name": "cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:scheme",
            "value": "affine_asymmetric"
          },
          {
            "name": "cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:granularity",
            "value": "per-tensor"
          },
          {
            "name": "cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:scale",
            "value": "0.0078125"
          },
          {
            "name": "cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:zeroPoint",
            "value": "128"
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }]
}
```

#### Example: Using quantization parameters (per-axis, affine symmetric)

> The following pseudocode shows how to describe a PyTorch-style per-axis INT8 affine symmetric quantization of a weight tensor along axis `0`. Because zero-point is fixed at zero by the symmetric contract, `zeroPoint` is omitted entirely. `scale` is still a JSON numeric array with one element per slice along the quantized axis.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following pseudocode shows how to describe a PyTorch-style per-axis INT8 affine symmetric quantization of a weight tensor along axis `0`. In this signed INT8 example, the symmetric convention uses `zeroPoint = 0`, which the example omits. The `scale` property value is a string containing a JSON-serialized numeric array with one element per slice along the quantized axis.
```

}
```

#### Example: Using quantization parameters (per-tensor, affine asymmetric)

The following pseudocode shows how to describe per-tensor affine asymmetric quantization parameters in a model card:

```jsonc
{
  // ...
  "components": [{
    "type": "machine-learning-model",
    "name": "my quantized model",
    "modelCard": {
      // ...
      "modelParameters": {
        "properties": [
          {
            "name": "cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:scheme",
            "value": "affine_asymmetric"
          },
          {
            "name": "cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:granularity",
            "value": "per-tensor"
          },
          {
            "name": "cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:scale",
            "value": "0.0078125"
          },
          {
            "name": "cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:zeroPoint",
            "value": "128"
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }]
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
#### Example: Using quantization parameters for a named input (per-tensor affine)

The following pseudocode records parameter-bound external affine mapping metadata for a named `uint8` input. The typed `quantization` object provides `bits`, `scheme`, and `granularity`, while sibling properties record the scalar `scale` and `zeroPoint` values for that input.

```jsonc
{
  // ...
  "components": [{
    "type": "machine-learning-model",
    "name": "my quantized model",
    "modelProperties": {
      "inputs": [{
        "name": "image",
        "modality": "image",
        "dataType": "uint8",
        "shape": [1, 224, 224, 3],
        "quantization": {
          "bits": 8,
          "scheme": "affine",
          "granularity": "per-tensor"
        },
        "properties": [
          {
            "name": "cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:scale",
            "value": "0.0078125"
          },
          {
            "name": "cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:zeroPoint",
            "value": "128"
          }
        ]
      }]
    }
  }]
}
```
````

Reviewer 2: For clarity, this example follows the current CycloneDX/specification#990 head (`49a9456`) for the enclosing object and path. It is not intended to take a position on the separate `modelCard` / `modelProperties` grouping discussion. The named-parameter binding and the division between typed fields and sibling properties are independent of that decision, and I can align the example with the final schema structure once it is settled.

The following pseudocode shows how to describe a PyTorch-style per-axis INT8 affine symmetric quantization of a weight tensor along axis `0`. In this signed INT8 example, the symmetric convention uses `zeroPoint = 0`, which the example omits. The `scale` property value is a string containing a JSON-serialized numeric array with one element per slice along the quantized axis.

```jsonc
{
  // ...
  "components": [{
    "type": "machine-learning-model",
    "name": "my symmetric per-axis quantized model",
    "modelCard": {
      // ...
      "modelParameters": {
        "properties": [
          {
            "name": "cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:scheme",
            "value": "affine_symmetric"
          },
          {
            "name": "cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:granularity",
            "value": "per-axis"
          },
          {
            "name": "cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:axis",
            "value": "0"
          },
          {
            "name": "cdx:ai-ml:model:parameter:quantization:scale",
            "value": "[0.00787402, 0.01574803, 0.00393701]"
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }]
}
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Per-axis affine quantization

Interpretation of a per-axis mapping requires an unambiguously identified tensor and sufficient shape information to interpret the selected axis and verify the cardinality of the scale vector and, when present, the zero-point vector.
```
